content/docs/nuctec/basics.md, before:

---
title: "Cheatsheets"
summary: "Units, constants, cheatsheets."
date: 2019-11-16T12:00:51+01:00
weight: 1
math: true
toc: true
---

# Cheatsheets

[Math quick references @ EEWeb](https://www.eeweb.com/tools/math-help)
(Algebra, Trigonometry, Derivatives, Integrals)

# Prefixes

```
k  (kilo)  = 1.0e3  = 1000
M  (mega)  = 1.0e6  = 1_000_000
G  (giga)  = 1.0e9  = 1_000_000_000
T  (tera)  = 1.0e12
P  (peta)  = 1.0e15
E  (exa)   = 1.0e18

c  (centi) = 1.0e-2 = 0.01
m  (milli) = 1.0e-3 = 0.001
mu (micro) = 1.0e-6 = 0.000001
n  (nano)  = 1.0e-9 = 0.000000001
p  (pico)  = 1.0e-12
```

# Units

**Newton** (N) = {{< katex "kg\cdot\cfrac{m}{s^2}" >}}

**Joule** (J) = {{< katex "kg\cdot\cfrac{m^2}{s^2} = N\cdot m" >}}. 1 Joule is the energy transferred when a force of 1 Newton is applied to an object, moving it a distance of 1 meter.

Power is given in **Watts** (W) = {{< katex "\cfrac{J}{s}" >}}.

Pressure is given in **Pascal** (Pa) = {{< katex "\cfrac{J}{m^3}" >}} (with {{< katex "1\,\text{Pa}=10^{-5}\,\text{bar}" >}}). Atmospheric pressure is 101325 Pa.

The **atomic mass unit** is defined such that the atomic weight of a neutral carbon-12 atom in its ground state is exactly 12 amu.
```
1 amu = 1.66053906660e−27 kg
      = 1.49241808560e−10 J
      = 931.49410242 MeV
```
The ratio of amu/atom is the same as the ratio of g/mol. **Mole** is a measure for the amount of a substance, where one mole is the quantity of anything that has the same number of atoms found in 12.000 grams of carbon-12, which are 6.023e23 atoms (**Avogadro's number**). So there are 6.023e23 atoms/mol.

The **electronvolt** is the energy gained or lost by an electron when accelerated through 1 volt of electric potential difference.
```
1 eV  = 1.602176634e-19 J
```
Electronvolt can also be used as a unit of mass, which is usually given in {{< katex "\cfrac{\text{eV}}{c^2}" >}} (with {{< katex "c" >}} the speed of light in vacuum).

The conversion factor between amu and MeV is {{< katex "931.49 \cfrac{\text{MeV}}{\text{amu}\cdot c^2}" >}}.

The activity of decay is usually given in **Curies**.
```
1 Ci = 3.7e10 disintegrations (decayed nuclei) per second
```

# Constants

```
e = 2.718281828459045
c = 299_792_458 m/s
```

Commit message:

add: cross-sections (part 1 of many)

content/docs/nuctec/basics.md, after:

---
title: "Cheatsheets"
summary: "Units, constants, cheatsheets."
date: 2019-11-16T12:00:51+01:00
weight: 1
math: true
toc: true
---

# Cheatsheets

[Math quick references @ EEWeb](https://www.eeweb.com/tools/math-help)
(Algebra, Trigonometry, Derivatives, Integrals)

# Prefixes

```
k  (kilo)  = 1.0e3  = 1000
M  (mega)  = 1.0e6  = 1_000_000
G  (giga)  = 1.0e9  = 1_000_000_000
T  (tera)  = 1.0e12
P  (peta)  = 1.0e15
E  (exa)   = 1.0e18

c  (centi) = 1.0e-2 = 0.01
m  (milli) = 1.0e-3 = 0.001
mu (micro) = 1.0e-6 = 0.000001
n  (nano)  = 1.0e-9 = 0.000000001
p  (pico)  = 1.0e-12
```

# Units

**Newton** (N) = {{< katex "kg\cdot\cfrac{m}{s^2}" >}}

**Joule** (J) = {{< katex "kg\cdot\cfrac{m^2}{s^2} = N\cdot m" >}}. 1 Joule is the energy transferred when a force of 1 Newton is applied to an object, moving it a distance of 1 meter.

Power is given in **Watts** (W) = {{< katex "\cfrac{J}{s}" >}}.

Pressure is given in **Pascal** (Pa) = {{< katex "\cfrac{J}{m^3}" >}} (with {{< katex "1\,\text{Pa}=10^{-5}\,\text{bar}" >}}). Atmospheric pressure is 101325 Pa.

The **atomic mass unit** is defined such that the atomic weight of a neutral carbon-12 atom in its ground state is exactly 12 amu.
```
1 amu = 1.66053906660e−27 kg
      = 1.49241808560e−10 J
      = 931.49410242 MeV
```
The ratio of amu/atom is the same as the ratio of g/mol. **Mole** is a measure for the amount of a substance, where one mole is the quantity of anything that has the same number of atoms found in 12.000 grams of carbon-12, which are 6.023e23 atoms (**Avogadro's number**). So there are 6.023e23 atoms/mol.

The **electronvolt** is the energy gained or lost by an electron when accelerated through 1 volt of electric potential difference.
```
1 eV  = 1.602176634e-19 J
```
Electronvolt can also be used as a unit of mass, which is usually given in {{< katex "\cfrac{\text{eV}}{c^2}" >}} (with {{< katex "c" >}} the speed of light in vacuum).

The conversion factor between amu and MeV is {{< katex "931.49 \cfrac{\text{MeV}}{\text{amu}\cdot c^2}" >}}.

The activity of decay is usually given in **Curies**.
```
1 Ci = 3.7e10 disintegrations (decayed nuclei) per second
```

Cross-sections are specified in **barn**.
```
1 barn = 10e-28 m^2
```

Distances on the sub-atomic level are usually given in **fermi**.
```
1 fm = 10e-15 m
```

# Constants

```
e = 2.718281828459045
c = 299_792_458 m/s
```
